---
title: The Fallibility of Perspective in Literature as Portrayed by The Hour of the Star
date: 2022-5-02
layout: blog
excerpt: In this essay, I look at the brilliant reflections of Clarice Lispector, a Brazillian existentialist and genius, in her final novella before her passing, in which she explores a number of metaphysical themes pertaining to identity.
thumbnailpath: /thumbnails/hourofthestar.png
---

Clarice Lispector, a Ukrainian-born Jewish Brazilian novelist, said in a translated interview: “I write without the hope that what I write changes anything at all. It changes nothing” (12:23). In response, the interviewer asks, “So why do you keep on writing?” With an aloof demeanor while lighting a cigarette, Lispector responds, “What do I know… Because at the end of the day we’re not trying to change things. We’re trying to open up somehow” (12:40). Lispector died prematurely of cancer at the age of 56 shortly after publishing her last book, titled The Hour of the Star. She suffered from an accident and spent the decade prior to her death in pain. This confluence of factors led to this book, The Hour of the Star, exploring a range of topics, some more grounded (i.e., issues of inequality in the Northeast of Brazil, where Lispector grew up) and some more metaphysical (i.e., the meaning of identity and ‘worth’). Subverting many conventions of literature, Lispector uses this unorganized, stream-of-consciousness style of writing to investigate the role of perspective in a narrative. Through the voice of the writer and the perspective of a northeastern girl named Macabea, Lispector conveys how literature wears a facade of objectivity and experience yet is liable to bias, ultimately calling into question the purpose of her own writing.

Purposefully writing from the perspective of an indecisive, self-important narrator, Rodrigo, Lispector explores the hidden influence of the writer within a text, demonstrating how values are filtered through their lens. While most narratives begin with purely exposition and plot, Lispector flips this structure by using the first third of the book to introduce Rodrigo and his often faux-philosophical ramblings to indirectly characterize him. Rodrigo accounts that, “I’m not going to adorn the word because if I touch the girl’s bread the bread will turn to gold,”(referencing Midas—a man who died of his own ambition) and that, “I humbly limit myself — without trumpeting my humility for then it wouldn’t be humble — I limit myself to telling of the lame adventures of a girl in a city that’s entirely against her” (18/19). Here, Lispector shows how a writer, Rodrigo, feels self-important in the value of his perspective and work, especially in his ‘humility’ in stooping low enough to write about a ‘lame’ girl. Rodrigo provides another glimpse of feigned self-awareness and humility by writing,“Forgive me but I’m going to keep talking about me” (19) Importantly, before the protagonist, Macabea, is even introduced, Rodrigo describes her as “so dumb that she sometimes smiles at other people on the street. Nobody smiles back because they don’t even look at her” (19). He characterizes this archetype of abject poverty writing, “They don’t even realize how easily substitutable they are and that they could just as soon drop off the face of the earth” (18). Rodrigo lends his unrequited opinion of Macabea prior to giving her any agency in the plot, establishing a tone of importance for the writer’s perspective. In this way, Lispector demonstrates how a writer’s perspective is forced upon a narrative, and thus imposes their morals on the telling of the story. Throughout the book, Rodrigo conveys his belief that a person’s worth is determined by their wealth and social position. For instance, he regards Macabea with disdain and pity because she lives in poverty, writing that “the person I’m going to talk about scarcely has a body to sell, nobody wants her, she’s a virgin and harmless, nobody would miss her” (18). Here, Rodrigo reduces Macabea’s humanity and worth to whether or not she can sell her body. Developing this, Lispector shows how a writer’s perspective can be hypocritical, writing of Rodrigo’s belief that “Truth is always an interior and inexplicable contact. My truest life is unrecognizable, extremely interior and there is not a single word that defines it” (15). Through the juxtaposition of these two beliefs, Lispector shows how the writer, Rodrigo, is inherently inconsistent in his approach to understanding worth. Simultaneously, he believes that his true worth (i.e., in his writing, in his life) is something inherently ‘interior’ and ‘inexplicable,’ yet that Macabea’s worth is solely determined by her socioeconomic standing. Expanding this past The Hour of the Star, Lispector depicts this writer’s cognitive dissonance to demonstrate how this genre of tragic literature, as a whole, is woefully riddled with the perspective of the writer, despite ‘humbly’ feigning objectivity and narrative. Rodrigo, stating that “I’ll try contrary to my normal habits to write a story with a beginning, middle and ‘grand finale’ followed by silence and falling rain” (16) despite using the entirety of the ‘beginning’ to ramble about himself and his thoughts about Macabea, is used by Lispector as a demonstration of how a typical ‘beginning’ (i.e., exposition, world building) is nothing but this rambling of the writer’s perspective and values, yet under the guise of detachment. Lispector argues through the inclusion of Rodrigo that the writer is not an aloof third-party, but rather a active component of the story insofar as Rodrigo says “The story---I determine with false free will---will have around seven characters and I’m obviously one of the more important” (16). Lispector intends to critique the supposed objectivity of literature and the writer in this caricature of a novella, almost with a tinge of sardonic amusement and pessimism toward the purpose of her own writing. Ultimately, by including the backstage process of writing through Rodrigo, Lispector demonstrates how moral perspective influences literature, especially with respect to identity and worth.

Further reinforcing the importance of perspective, Lispector compares the characterization of Macabea before and after the fortune teller as well as uses the clock radio as a symbol to investigate the subtle difference between experiential truth and intellectual truth. Save the perspective of the narrator and the people around her, Macabea is primarily demonstrated to be quite apathetic towards her ‘suffering’ and poverty. Unlike a reader or writer might expect, Macabea does not wallow in her woes and believe her life is terrible. This curious facet of her personality comes to a fore when she encounters a self-important, wealthy fortune teller, who manufactures hope by telling her that she will become wealthy and marry rich, “your life is going to change completely! And even more: it will change the minute you step out of this house! You’ll feel completely different.[...] But, little Macabéa dear, what a horrible life! May my friend Jesus take pity on you, my child! How awful! Macabéa blanched: it had never occurred to her that her life was that bad. [...] Macabéa’s eyes were opened wide as if by a sudden voracity for the future (explosion). And I too am finally beginning to hope.” (79-80). In this excerpt, Lispector reveals how Macabea, up until the influence of another perspective, was content with her ‘worth’ as a person. That, up to this new frontier of feeling hopeful, Macabea was never given the opportunity to ‘suffer.’ Lispector includes Macabea’s belief that her life had only just started which draws attention to the fact that she dies in the fetal position only a few pages later. Rodrigo writes that, “despite everything she belonged to a stubborn race of dwarves that one day might reclaim the right to scream” (83). In this way, Lispector contradicts the ‘axiom’ that individuals in bad situations endure suffering, since Macabea was at worst accepting of her condition prior to gaining the experiential truth of hope. She emphasizes this difference between Macabea’s intellectual knowledge of what it would be like to be wealthy versus the experiential truth of earnestly hoping and believing in the possibility of a future with wealth and luxury. Importantly, Lispector intends this shift in perspective to parallel and critique the way the reader and writer impose their relative morals on a character in literature; she challenges the ‘objectivity’ of a story in this way by conveying the fallibility of literature in providing alternate perspectives. Similar to her belief that writing is a personal (almost selfish) understanding of the self, she shows how the reader only interprets a story through their own beliefs and values. The introduction to the narrative makes clear that this is not a “cheap tearjerker,” breaking the fourth wall and commenting on its purpose to society. In this way, The Hour of the Star is a self-aware critique of the type of literature that panders to a privileged audience, since it actively contradicts its assumptions. This relationship between privilege and literature demonstrates Lispectors point that Intellectual truth can never replace Experiential truth. Within the plot, Lispector uses Macabea’s Clock Radio to highlight this aspect of life, with Macabea saying “Did you know that on Clock Radio they said that a man wrote a book called “Alice in Wonderland” and that he was also a mathematician? They also talked about “elgebra." What does “elgebra” mean? [...] On that station they say this thing about “culture” and difficult words, for example: what does “electronic” mean?” (54). In this excerpt, the Clock Radio serves as a device to demonstrate this difference between ‘knowing’ and ‘experiencing.’ Similar to how the reader uses the book to ‘know’ the life of a northeastern girl, Macabea uses the Clock Radio to ‘know’ about the world. Hence here, Lispector draws attention, again, to how perspective often corresponds to experience: how ‘knowing’ something is unequal to ‘experiencing’ something. In essence, this is a critique of literature and its lack of an ability to provide ulterior perspectives. In this novel, Lispector highlights a number of moments to demonstrate the contrast between Macabea's life and the reader’s life. Hence overall, Lispector uses Macabea’s interactions with the fortune teller and the clock radio to mock both the reader’s experience of reading a book and the writer’s experience of writing a book, ultimately shining light on the fallibility of literature as a whole.
