---
title: Two-Hands Arrangement of 'Main Theme' from Octopath Traveler [midi]
date: 2021-11-29
layout: blog
excerpt: An original composition for piano using a sample of a ticking clock as a stimulus. The suspense grows as the ticking clock speeds up, adding another level of anticipation and anxiety culminating in an 'armageddon'--esque tone.
pdfpath: /pdfs/OctopathTwoPiano.pdf
audiopath: /audio/OctopathTwoPianos.mp3
thumbnailpath: /thumbnails/OctopathTwoPianos.png
---
To explore unfamiliar territory as an arranger, I chose to reinvent an orchestral piece for four hands piano. My stimulus was “Main Theme” from Octopath Traveler, composed by Yasonuri Nishiki. I came across this song within a videogame I had not played. I was intrigued by the instrumentation and western style despite its Japanese origin. I hadn’t written for four hands on the piano; I was excited to undertake the challenge. Therefore, this project falls under Global Context and AOI 3, since I adapted music to an unfamiliar instrumentation and the music evokes emotion within the game. 

My initial brainstorm consisted of exploring unfamiliar music in a variety of genres. I decided on this arrangement after listening to the four-hands piano work of Schubert and Brahms, notably Schubert’s Sonata in C major for piano four-hands, D 812, wherein he utilizes block chords and intertwines melody between the primo and secondo players. I sought more research material to understand the facets of disseminating complex melodies and harmonies from many instruments to four hands. One tip I found helpful was not limiting my top voice to the melody; at times I had a pianissimo sans acentuacion ostinato in the top voice adding glitter to the harmony. Additionally, I incorporated a call/response melody in the treble of the secondo piano. Overall, I found my research into the conventions of four-hands piano useful in expanding my musical vocabulary within this style.

My 32-bar composition was the first section of the orchestral piece. Using piano dynamics, I tried to emulate the chugging chords in the strings section. In the first section, I also used acciaccatura to emulate the sound of wind instruments. I often deviated from the stimulus piece by adding in extra chord extensions and voicing the melody in 3rds 5ths and 6ths. After the sudden key change, I employed dynamic contrast between the secondo piano playing melody and the primo piano contributing to harmony with ostinato ‘trill-like’ chords using various diatonic 2nds in the appropriate mode (e.g., Ab lydian, Eb dorian, etc.). I included this novel motif throughout the piece because it added a ‘glitter-like’ feeling to the harmony. Lastly, I incorporated syncopation and thick cluster-chords to give the final two sections momentum and emphasis.

Overall, I was pleased with the outcome of my exploration, although it was more difficult than anticipated. Throughout the project, the most time-consuming part was adapting parts such that the pianists could play notes comfortably without overlapping. This had the effect of forcing me to interchange my melodies between hands and to write in some confusing fingerings. Despite the difficulty, I feel that I learnt a lot about composing for four hands piano during this process. If I were to complete this assignment once more, I would record each part since the sampled piano on the notation software made certain parts sound too muddy. By recording it, I would achieve more realistic dynamics between the melody and the filler notes within the chords.
